In this lecture, we are going to learn about another optional section of Jenkins file environment variable
section.
As the name suggests, this is very similar to Linux environment variable or any global variable.
In Python or Java, you define environment variables under the section environment.
And let's say in this case I'm creating this variable name stage and I'm defining this value.
What to it?
This variable will be available throughout the whole pipeline script.
Alternatively, you can also define environment within stage.
Even though that's not very common, you can access this environment variable like this.
Let's say I want to display this stage variable.
So if I want to display it, I'm going to do echo.
Current stage is then the dollar symbol and then curly braces and then name of the environment variable.
Some environment variables Jenkins provides you out of the box.
Those are standard environment variables.
For example, every time you submit a Jenkins job, it gets submitted with a unique build number.
So this build number is available to you using standard variable build underscore number.
So for example if I want to display it echo current build number is dollar calibrates build underscore
number.
Not that I did not need to define this build underscore number in this environment section and this
build number is quite handy.
And let's say for example, we are building a Docker container image and instead of using the tag latest
for each build, I want to use the build number as the tag.
So each of the docker container generated is unique for each build.
So here is an example.
And don't worry, we are going to go through all this Jenkins file when we go through reusable projects
and real world projects.
But in this case I am building a Docker image and I'm tagging it with dollar build underscore number.
So every time this job is run, a new docker container image will be created with the tag, same as
the build number of the job.
So how do you know what other standard environment variables Jenkins is providing it to you?
To find that out.
All you need to do is simply go to the URL of your Jenkins and then slash pipeline death syntax slash
gobbles pound env.
So if I go to the page for my Jenkins so you can see it lists all the variables.
We displayed the example with the build number, but there a bunch of other ones available.
So one of the most practical use cases of environment section is actually username and password.
Let's say you have a bunch of username password saved under Jenkins credential.
Let's say in this case I have my docker hive user I.D. and token saved under the ID Docker hub.
So if I want to use this in my Jenkins file, I will define this environment section and then this variable
docker hub underscore creds.
I am grabbing the credentials where the ID is Docker hub.
Remember the username and the password is saved with the same ID it needs to match.
So the important part here is when you use this environment variable in this way, Jenkins will create
two different variables under the hood, so it will save that username for these Docker hub credentials
in the variable Docker hub, underscore creds, underscore user or user.
And it will also save the passwords with Docker hub, underscore creds, underscore P as W.
So if I scroll down, I can use the Docker login command with the username Docker hub, underscore creds,
underscore user password as Docker Hub underscore creds, underscore P as W.
Not that you did not have to define this, underscore us R or underscore P as W in this environment
section.
Don't worry too much about this particular Jenkins file.
We will go over this Jenkins file in detail when you go over how to build and push your container image
to Docker Hub.
All right, folks, that's how you use the environment section.
That's it for this one.
I'll see you guys and girls in the next lecture.